Contributor/runtime, first version (#105)
decentraland/documentation: content/contributor/runtime/modules/engine_api.md

Over time, as entities are created and deleted, it's perfectly valid to reuse IDs that were previously freed -- indeed, this may be required for perfomance reasons ([see below](crdtStateDeleteEntities)).

### Synchronization {#synchronization}

Both the World Explorer and the scene must manage a set of shared entities and components, where updates come from both sides in an asynchronous fashion. Without additional measures, their versions of the state of the world can (and will) end up being different.

To prevent this, a CRDT ([conflict-free replicated data type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type)) is used to reach an agreement between both parties by exchanging messages with updates. This offers a number of advantages:

* Both parties can update the state independently and concurrently.
* Conflicts are managed by a shared resolution strategy applied locally by both parties.
* Both parties are guaranteed to converge to a shared, identical state.
* Besides a small overhead in message size, no additional coordination or messaging round-trips are required.

{{< info >}}

> This page explains the use of the CRDT to synchronize state between a locally running scene and the game engine, but the real potential of this mechanism lies in multiplayer scenarios. Using this protocol, players can coordinate their game state and share experiences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page explains the use of the CRDT to synchronize state between a locally running scene and the game engine, but the real potential of this mechanism lies in multiplayer scenarios. Using this protocol, players can coordinate their game state and share the same experience.
```

| |  |       |<-+-----------------------+--+       |  | |
| |  '-------'  |                       |  '-------'  | |
| |             |                       |             | |
| '-------------'                       '-------------' |
'-------------------------------------------------------'
```

The implementation of the CRDT synchronization mechanism consists of three parts:

1. An internal representation of the state of all entities and components.
2. A conflict resolution strategy to choose between competing states.
3. A messaging protocol to communicate and process updates to the state.

#### CRDT State {#crdtState}

The CRDT holds the state of all components for all their attached entities, and can be stored in a mapping of components to timestamped states for each entity. In pseudocode:

```ts
// The (completely generic) state of a component for a specific entity, at a point in time:
type EntityComponentState = { timestamp: number, state: byte[] }

// The state of a component for all attached entities:
type ComponentState = Map<EntityId, EntityComponentState>

// The entire state of the CRDT:
type CRDTState = Map<ComponentId, ComponentState>
```

> Timestamps aren't actually Unix-style timestamps. They are a type of shared incremental counter to sequence updates, with no relation to clock time. More on this [below](#timestamps).

Reviewer 2: Lamport timestamps are scoped using entityId+componentId as keys
```suggestion
Timestamps aren't actually Unix-style timestamps. They are a type of incremental counter to sequence updates, with no relation to clock time. More on this [below](#timestamps).
```

| entity: uint32 |
'----------------'              
```

Note that there is no `timestamp` field. Since the lifespan of `entity` is over, the conflict resolution strategy for any out-of-order updates is to simply ignore them.

## Methods

The set of methods in `EngineApi` provide the interface to exchange messages and reconstruct the state of the world from scratch.

###### `crdtSendToRenderer` {#crdtSendToRenderer}

Send a serialized message from the scene to the renderer, return an array of serialized messages that the renderer has for the scene.

```ts
interface Request {
  // The serialized message for this request:
  data: byte[]
}

interface Response {
  // An array of serialized messages from the renderer (if any):
  data: byte[][]
}

function crdtSendToRenderer(Request): Promise<Response>
```

###### `crdtGetState` {#crdtGetState}

```ts
interface Request {}

interface Response {
  // Whether the state has scene-created entities:
  hasEntities: boolean

  // An array of messages that can reconstruct the CRDT state:
  data: byte[][]
}

function crdtGetState(Request): Promise<Response>
```

> ## Supporting Legacy Scenes

Reviewer 2: I'd mention that the SDK6 and backwards is out of scope of the Dcl protocol
